---
title: "D3"
weight: 1
# bookFlatSection: false
# bookCollapseSection: false
# bookComments: true
---

# Data Driven Docs?
While it's a good library overall, I'm learning how to make network graphs with it.
Here goes nothing 😛

Oooh, this is one crazy library with a heck lot of things it can do. Nice confusion.
These might be some good resources:
* [Official tutorial](https://observablehq.com/@d3/learn-d3)
* [Huge collection of tutorials](https://github.com/d3/d3/wiki/Tutorials)
* I like Pluralsight. Videos can be helpful y'know.
[This course seems updated](https://app.pluralsight.com/library/courses/d3-data-visualization-fundamentals/table-of-contents)
* [An updated D3 tutorial](https://www.d3indepth.com/) (taken from the GitHub list) should also help!

## Selection
One feature of d3 is the ability to select and modify the DOM.

Core to this are `select` and `selectAll` which take in an HTML Element or a CSS selector.
Both return a `Selection` object.

[API](https://github.com/d3/d3/blob/main/API.md#selections-d3-selection) for selecting and selections.

### Properties

The object has a few functions, each of which return a `Selection` object
(that means chaining is possible)
| Function      | Params                | Description       |
| -----------   | -----------           | -----------       |
| style         | 'css-prop', value     | Sets a css property |
| attr          | 'html-attr', value    | Sets an attribute on the HTML element |
| classed       | 'classname', value    | Removes or adds class depending on value |
| property      | 'html-prop', value    | Sets HTML attributes which can't be set by 'attr'. E.g. `checked` on a checkbox |
| text          | value                 | Sets the text within a HTML element |
| html          | value                 | Sets HTML within the selected element |
| select        | CSS selector          | Can be used to select child elements |

`value` can be an actual value or a function. The function takes in two params:
* `d` the datum, which is the data value corresponding to the index
* `i` the index of the element among other elements in the Selection.

Its possible to add an event to the Selection with the `on` property like so:
```js
d3.select('rect')
  .on('hover', function(event, datum) { // can be any DOM event
    // `this` inside this function refers to the HTMLElement
    // to get a d3 Selction from it you must do d3.select(this)
  }); 
```

{{< hint "danger" >}}
Because of the way `this` works inside arrow functions,
don't use arrow functions for the callback of `on`.
{{< /hint >}}

### Insertion / Deletion
Its possible to insert / remove DOM elements with D3. The functions are:
* `.append('element-tag')` creates the specified element as the last child of the selection
* `.insert('element-tag', 'css-selector')` same as append
but it places this element before the CSS selector specified
* `.remove` removes the element(s) in the Selection from the DOM

### Processing
A Selection can be processed in these ways:
* `.each(function(d, i){}` calls the function for each element.
* `.call(function(theSelection){})` calls the function once for the selection.
It passes the selection object as an argument.
* `.filter(function(d, i){})` calls the function for each element.
It returns a new selection that only contains elements that returned true in the filter function.
* `.sort(function(datumA, datumB){})` sorts the elements in the DOM with the comparator function.

## Data Joins
Modifying visual elements according to data. It usually works like this:
* Create a Selection of the parent element which will hold the visual elements.
* Create an empty Selection with `.selectAll('element-to-join')`.
* Create a Selection with data by calling the `data` method on it with an array as the argument.
* On the latest selection call `.join('element-to-insert')`

[Article to help with understanding joins](https://bost.ocks.org/mike/join/).
[Another article. This one's about modern joins](https://observablehq.com/@d3/selection-join)

Data joins in D3 follow declarative programming.
Given some elements and an array of data there are three kinds of selections possible:
* Enter : For array elements that don't have a corresponding DOM element
* Update : For existing DOM elements. They're mapped to the array elements
* Exit : For existing DOM elements that don't have an array element to map to

An example. Given a DOM like:
```html
<svg>
  <g>
    <circle></circle>
    <circle></circle>
  </g>
</svg>
```
Circles can be selected like so:
```js
let data = [10, 8, 15];
let circs = d3.select('g').selectAll('circle');
```
Existing elements can be joined with data like so:
```js
circs.data(data).attr('r', d => 2*d);
```
New elements can be created for extra datum:
```js
circs.data(data).enter().append('circle')
```
Elements which don't have a datum:
```js
circs.data(data).exit()
```

That can be tedious. A more concise way is using the new selection join (D3 v5+).
### Selection Join
This join automatically appends and removes elements but also provides the ability for fine control.
A sample:
```js
d3.select('g')
  .selectAll('circle')
  .data(array)
  .join('circle')
  .attr('fill', 'blue');
```
To control what happens to enter, update and exit elements, pass functions as args to it like so:
```js
selexon.join(
  function(enterSelection){},
  function(updateSelection){},
  function(exitSelection){}
)
```

### Keys
It's possible to make sure that DOM elements are exactly matched with the same data
even if the elements are moved around.
This is possible via a key function which assigns keys to DOM elements based on the data they get like so:

```js
xyz.data(array, function(d){ /* return unique id */ })
```