---
title: "Testing"
weight: 10
---
# Unit & Integrated tests
Angular uses Jasmine for unit testing and Karma to run the tests on browsers. Tests can be:

{{< columns >}}

#### Isolated
* Only tests the JS class not the component
* Mostly used for services and pipes
* Need to create instances of classes on your own
<--->
#### Integrated
* Tests the class and template together
* Mostly used for components and directives
* The objects are created by the framework

{{< /columns >}}

## Unit tests
They test a single unit (like a class, function, or a bunch of classes) in isolation. Some features of unit tests:
* Fast (to code and to execute)
* Should handle one state change at max
* Assert one thing
* Minimal dependencies

They follow a structure of:
* Assemble - The setup code for the test
* Action - The thing that the user will likely do. Can be a state change
* Assert - "Is the result what is expected?"

Run unit tests with `ng test` which asks Karma to look for *.spec.ts files and execute the tests within them.
A basic test looks like this:
```ts
describe('a nice test', () => {
    // do something
    beforeEach(() => {
        // code to run before each 'it'
    })

    it('exact test stuff', () => {
        // do something
        expected(valA).toBe('good stuff');
    })
})
```
{{< hint "info" >}}
`toBe` is just one of the many "matchers" jasmine has. The official docs has [a list of matchers](https://jasmine.github.io/api/4.0/matchers)
{{< /hint >}}

### Mocking
To minimize depedencies on external code they are **mocked** for things like network calls, DB use, side effects etc. E.g. instead of making HTTP requests with the http dependency use a mock http dependency that simulates network calls and returns results immediately.

* Mock with jasmine like this: `const mockStuff jasmine.createSpyObj('some desc', ['method1', 'method2', 'method3'])`.
* A particular method can be modified to return a particular value like this: `mockStuff.method1.and.returnValue(anyValue)`
* To check if a method is being called in the function with particular params, use: `expect(mockStuff.method2).toHaveBeenCalledWith(param1, param2)` where the parameters can be exact values or it can just check that the types match by passing in an arg like `jasmine.any(ClassName)`
* Components can be tested just like services for isolated tests. Instantiate the class with mock dependencies, set any input params and then test whatever methods needed to be tested.

## Integrated tests
They're more complex and are meant to test an entire functionality. It can test the template and the component in an environment that's a close approximation to real world usage.

### Setup
This is more complex since Angular creates the instances of the component and template and places them in a module. This setup goes in a `beforeEach`. The code for this is usually generated by the cli when using `ng g c` and is placed in "*.component.spec.ts". It looks like this:
```ts
// inside a describe callback
let component: NiceComponent; // the type
let fixture: ComponentFixture<NiceComponent>; // from "@angular/core/testing"
let debugEl: DebugElement; // handle to the template
let rawHTML: HTMLElement; // handle to the raw html of the template

let mockThatService; // mock object for a dependency

beforeEach(() => {
    // if you don't want complex functionality no need to use a spyObj
    // a simple object with the props required will do
    mockThatService = {};

    // creates the module where the component will run
    TestBed.configureTestingModule({
        declarations: [
            component
        ],
        providers: [
            { provide: ThatService, useValue: mockThatService }
        ]
    });

    fixture = TestBed.createComponent(NiceComponent);
    component = TestBed.componentInstance;
    debugEl = TestBed.debugElement;
    rawHTML = TestBed.nativeElement;

    // runs change detection so the template is kept updated with the component
    fixture.detectChanges();
})
```

### Deep & Shallow tests
A shallow integration test just includes the component that is being tested while a deep test will also include the necessary children component (but may not test them).
A deep test is heavy because of dependencies but it is complete.

When using a shallow test, it is possible to ignore the errors caused by dependencies on other components.
This is done by adding a **schema** to the testing module like so:
```ts
TestBed.configureTestingModule({
    declarations: [/* wtv */],
    providers: [/* wtv */],
    schemas: [
        NO_ERRORS_SCHEMA // from angular core
    ]
})
```

# Debugging
This can be a pain. Here are some tools to help:
* [Augury](https://augury.rangle.io/) can present info neatly in dev tools.
* [ngx-logger](https://www.npmjs.com/package/ngx-logger) is a nice logger apparently.
* Put `debugger` in your TS code so it can be paused in the browser.